Deep sleep tutorial. (#407)
toitware/web-docs: docs/tutorials/hardware/deepsleep.mdx

# Deep sleep
This tutorial will show how to put an ESP32 into deep sleep, and how
to wake it up again.

<Note>

If you are using [Toit's fleet management](../../getstarted/fleet), then
you don't need to worry about deep sleep. Artemis (the installed
container of the fleet management system) automatically puts the device
into deep sleep when it is not running any programs.

</Note>

> The ESP32 touch sensor detects variations in capacitance on the GPIO pins,

Reviewer: wat?

Should this go elsewhere?

```

Run it, and then remove the connection between pin 32 and ground. Without
any pull-down resistor the pin is floating and thus measures mostly random
values. You are likely to see the ESP32 wake up almost immediately. If not,
try touching the pin with your finger or even connecting the pin to 3V3.

If you have a [button](../button) (especially the ones with integrated
pull-down resistors) you can also use it to wake up the ESP32.

## Wake up from touch
The ESP32 can also be woken up with the touch sensor.

### Setup
Connect a male-male jumper wire to pin 32. Keep one end of the wire
free. We will use this end as touch button.

### Code
Edit your `sleep.toit` program to the following and run it with Jaguar.
If necessary change the threshold value. See the [Touch button](../touch)
tutorial for more information about the touch sensor.

```toit
import esp32
import gpio
import gpio.touch as gpio

main:
  pin := gpio.Pin 32
  touch := gpio.Touch pin
  touch.threshold = 800
  esp32.enable_touchpad_wakeup
  esp32.deep_sleep (Duration --m=3)
```

The ESP32 will go to sleep for three minutes, or wake up if it
registers a touch on pin 32.

## Power consumption

> When the ESP32 is in deep sleep it only consumes about 10µA. However,

Reviewer: I think it is actually less than that.

Author: Actually went to the datasheet, and there it is 10.

> this assumes that no other components are drawing any power. There is
> a significant difference between different ESP32 boards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this assumes that no other components are drawing any power. There are
significant differences between different ESP32 boards.
```
